[MUSIC PLAYING]
JEAN MURPHY: Today I'm speaking
with Rich Thompson, Director
of the Supply Chain
and Logistics Group
at Jones Lang LaSalle.
Welcome, Rich.
RICH THOMPSON: Oh, thanks, Jean.
JEAN MURPHY: I know you
work with a lot of retailers
in terms of their site
selection decisions
when it comes to warehousing
and distribution facilities.
What are some of the issues
driving those decisions
these days?
RICH THOMPSON: Well, I think the
basic site selection decisions
are being made on some
of the criteria which
you would expect and has
always really been the case.
As you know, supply
chain professionals
are always trying to
balance cost and service.
That's their game.
And when it comes to cost as
it relates to a distribution
center, it's all
about freight costs.
It's all about inventory cost.
It's all about labor costs.
And the real estate aspect
is critical to get right,
but it's a smaller percentage
of the total operating costs.
On the service
side, of course, you
know that is very much driven
by the individual company.
But it's a balance
of those things.
It's the big cost
buckets that I just
mentioned with that of their
customer service requirements.
JEAN MURPHY: It seems that
we've gone through fads where
you see centralization
and then greater
distribution getting out
closer to the customer.
How does that look these days?
RICH THOMPSON: Well, that's
an interesting question.
Because, as you know and I think
as most of our retail clients
have been concerned, it's
with increasing freight costs.
And it's our point of view as
well that transportation costs
will continue to escalate
over the coming years, driven
not only by oil prices, but a
whole variety of other factors.
And so as freight costs
go up, academically you
would think you would have
more facilities closer
to your customer.
We're actually not seeing
that right now in reality.
And in fact, in our
business what we're seeing
is that there is a real scarcity
of the bigger facilities,
the bigger distribution
centers, meaning over
500,000 square feet in
big primary markets.
So that's where the demand is.
And I don't think we find that
surprising from the standpoint
that the economy is
still pretty-- you know,
pretty shaky, up and
down, hasn't really
turned the corner yet.
Although there's
cautious optimism,
I think, right now is
how I would explain it.
But I think as the
economy turns and I
think as freight
costs go up, I think
we'll see a greater
emphasis on what we would
call the second tier markets.
And you'll see a
tendency for companies
to want to have more facilities
closer to their customer.
JEAN MURPHY: In the
commercial retail market,
did we see the same
kind of decline
in demand that we saw
in the housing market?
RICH THOMPSON: Yes,
you know I wouldn't
put the sort of
personal housing market
and the commercial real estate
market on the same plane,
but there was very
much a turn down
in the commercial
real estate world.
As you know, in
supply chain it's
all about industrial real
estate-- plants and warehouses
and distribution centers.
And there was clearly a big
turn down in that marketplace.
But what we saw was that
the bigger companies
were sort of taking
advantage of that downturn
and sort of upgrading
in their space needs.
So if they were in what we
call a Class B facility,
they were upgrading
and making changes
in terms of their
distribution center needs
in a way to sort of take
advantage of the down economy.
And so I think some of
the smarter companies that
knew they were going to
survive it were smart
and did take advantage
of the downturn.
Right Right.
We hear so much about
the infrastructure
in this country and the
need to improve our roads.
And not so much the railroads
at this point, I don't think.
But my question is, how is
the infrastructure or the lack
of infrastructure improvements
impacting decisions
that companies can make
about where they have
their distribution facilities?
RICH THOMPSON: Well, you know
that's an interesting question.
And I absolutely agree with
you that the supply chain
infrastructure in the US is in
need of investment and repair.
There's a lot of talk, and
you read a lot about that.
And I'm in agreement that
now would be a good time
to reinvest in those key
assets-- highways and bridges
and ports and other critical
aspects of our infrastructure.
I don't see that really
impacting site selection
decisions, however.
You know, as it relates
to sort of highways,
I don't see any-- or
bridges-- I don't see anyone
evaluating those-- call it
risk issues or considerations--
as a part of site selection.
It certainly comes into play
a little bit on the port side.
But that's less
about infrastructure
and more about depth and
development around the ports.
But it's an important
issue to our economy.
And hopefully we'll see
some direct investments,
and some people getting
to work on those kinds
of important things
for our economy.
JEAN MURPHY: Are there
any other innovations
in the supply chain or in
the technology that you
see impacting the way
your customers are
acting in the marketplace?
RICH THOMPSON:
Being here at RILA
and having spent some time
with our big retail clients,
I think it's clear that one
of the fastest growing aspects
of retail is e-commerce.
And companies now recognize,
especially retailers,
that they need to bring
those skill sets in-house.
And it's no longer going
to really be sustainable
for them to outsource that.
And that's not true
of every company,
but certainly, I think, on
some of the larger companies.
And one of the things we
heard from Laura Sen today,
who is the CEO of
BJ's Wholesale Club,
is that systems are critical
to that, and the technology.
Because when you're
talking about the biggest
challenge for retailers, which
is omnichannel, multichannel,
however you want
to think about it--
one of the things that
enables that success clearly
is having the IT systems to be
able to be sophisticated enough
to manage that process.
And I know she described
it as a big concern.
And I also know
that Amazon would
place a huge amount of
emphasis on their success
in e-commerce due to their
very much proprietary system.
So that's clearly an important
technology to retailers today.
JEAN MURPHY: Help me understand
how this omnichannels compare
to multichannels.
How much of a step
increase is it?
What does that mean exactly?
RICH THOMPSON: Well, you know,
I use them interchangeably.
So a lot of people refer
to multichannel strategy,
meaning you might have a
traditional retail distribution
center that's primary
role in the past
has been to service
the retail store, which
is a different
delivery mechanism,
or requires different
technology and material
handling, equipment,
and everything else,
and different sizing and
everything, design and layout.
And then you have
the traditional,
dedicated e-commerce
facility like an Amazon might
have, which is very high
tech, large amount of labor,
very seasonal.
And then you have what
we call or are referring
to as multichannel
or omnichannel,
meaning it kind of
does everything.
And so I think that's the
holy grail for retail today
is getting that figured
out in a way that works
for your particular company.
And so I think of them as
kind of interchangeable.
But really what it means
to me is having the ability
to do more than one thing
out of a distribution center.
JEAN MURPHY: OK, thanks
for clarifying that.
So are there any other
trends that you're watching?
RICH THOMPSON: Well, I
think the key thing still
today, Jean-- and I'd like to
come up with a really hot trend
to share with you-- but
it's cost reduction,
and it's cost mitigation.
It was interesting today
at the RILA conference.
They did a survey of all
the retailers present.
And they said, do
you feel the economy
and the current political
situation in the US
is helping your business now
or hurting your business?
And there was
variations on that.
But 70% of the respondents
today indicated
that the economy was still
hurting their business
or had a slightly negative
impact on their business.
And so when you
think about that,
and I think that's true
from what we're hearing,
companies are still very
cost conscious and working
to mitigate increasing freight
costs and other concerns
in their business.
But also want to
enable the growth
in areas such as e-commerce.
So you know nothing that's
a silver bullet today.
But still very much
a focus on keeping
the business rolling and
keeping costs under control.
JEAN MURPHY: Do you
have any projections
as to when that might turn,
in terms of our perception,
at least, of the economy?
RICH THOMPSON: You know
I wish I did, Jean.
You know the economy
question's an interesting one.
I do think companies are
cautiously optimistic.
And there's been a lot of great
sort of economic indicators
that suggest that the
economy is coming out
of this kind of lull period
we've been experiencing
for the past several years.
The real question to me is
how quickly will it come out.
I am of the opinion
that the economy
has kind of made a
turn for the better
and will continue to climb out.
But the question is
at what trajectory?
Because that will have an
impact on trucking capacity
and other concerns that
I think are very real.
JEAN MURPHY: All right,
great information.
Thank you so much for
being with us today.
RICH THOMPSON: Oh thanks
for having me, Jean.
JEAN MURPHY: I've been speaking
with Rich Thompson of Jones
Lang LaSalle.
Thank you for watching.